When we talked about JCL,
we mentioned that it can
be used to call a program.
That's something
you're probably pretty
familiar with, running a program.
JCL can also call a procedure.
Now, a procedure is a set of
frequently used
JCL statements that
have been grouped
together and named
so they can be invoked
using a single name.
Most JCL procedures perform
a general function,
which allows them to be called
from a variety of jobs.
That just makes
a whole lot of sense
from an efficiency standpoint.
It's easier and
cleaner to reference
a procedure than
a series of statements,
especially if they're going to be
used the same way each time.
Procedures are usually stored
in the system datasets.
That makes them the procedure,
libraries, or PROCLIB, for short.
You can think of a procedure like
a play that a football
team might have.
All of the movements
and the details are
all set and rehearsed
ahead of time,
and you just have
to call it by name.
That makes the
PROCLIB the playbook,
a collection of
commonly used steps,
each with its own name.
When a procedure is
placed into PROCLIB,
it can be made available
to a wider audience.
It can also be referenced
simply by name
instead of specifying
the full path each time.
However, procedures
can also be stored in
private PROCLIBs or
even within a job.
This tree tricks
who can call them,
and sometimes that's by design.
There are two types
of procedures,
catalog procedures and
in-stream procedures.
Both types are
invoked by using one
of the following JCL statements.
You can say stepname
EXEC PROC equals
procedure_name or
stepname EXEC procedure_name.
You can see how this works here,
and it spells out some of
the benefits of
using a procedure.
All of these steps and
everything that
connects it altogether,
it's now all within
this single procedure,
and a programmer can very
easily reference
that one procedure.
Here's an example of
an in-stream procedure.
So we've got this line up
here saying here's our procedure,
and below it, here's step one,
which is going to execute
a program called APGM.
The whole thing goes between
the PROC and PEND
procedure end statement.
This is our in-stream procedure.
If you're using
a catalog procedure,
you don't have to code
the PROC and PEND statements.
However, if an in-stream
PROC statement
is coded into
a catalog procedure,
then it has to be
the procedure's first statement.
You can see here,
once we've defined
that in-stream procedure by name,
we can reference
it in later steps.
As you can also see,
like we've mentioned before,
there are two ways of calling it.
You can also see that when
you reference a procedure,
you could be referencing
an in-stream procedure,
one in a system PROCLIB or
one in a private PROCLIB.
Now, if the procedure is in
a private procedure library,
that library needs
to be specified on
the job's JCLLIB statement,
which needs to appear
before the EXEC statement.
If the called procedure is
cataloged in a system library,
it will be retrieved from the
SIS1.PROCLIB or another
defined procedure library.
If it's not in any of those,
then it won't be able to run
your specified procedure,
it can't find it.
About that JCLLIB statement.
We've mentioned
that it can be used
to define private PROCLIBs.
It can also be used to
determine the order
in which the PROCLIB
should be searched.
So if you specify PROCLIBs
in your JCLLIB statement,
it will look for those before it
looks in the default
system procedure library.
You may only need to
specify one PROCLIB here,
or if you need to
specify two or more,
just separate them by commas
and put them inside parenthesis.
You only get one JCLLIB
statement per job,
and it must appear after
the job statement and before
the first EXEC statement.
We have another useful
statement called INCLUDE.
If you have a series
of JCL statements
coded within a member of a PDS,
you can insert them into JCL
using an INCLUDE statement.
So here's the INCLUDE statement.
It's got the name of the include,
the statement INCLUDE, and
then the dataset name.
When the JCL is being read,
it gets there and
it just replaces it
with all the contents
of that dataset.
Where this comes in handy
is when you need to define
a whole bunch of DD statements
for a series of JCLs.
Now, you could just
copy and paste them.
But then you would
also have to go
around fixing all of them
every single time
you want to make
a change to those DD statements.
It's a whole lot easier
to write them once
so you can reference them
with an INCLUDE statement.
If there's updates to be made,
you only have to make
those updates in one place.
A couple of limitations on
procedures and includes.
Procedures can be nested up
to a maximum of 15 levels.
So that's a procedure,
calling a procedure,
and you get the idea.
So you get some flexibility,
but you can't just go nuts with
procedures referencing
other procedures.
Same thing with includes,
you got it to a maximum of
15 levels there as well.
A procedure can reference
an include group.
Then an include group
can access a procedure.
So what you're seeing here is
an example of
a procedure called EVAL,
which has a procedure named
EPRT nested within it.
In addition,
the procedure EPRT has
an include group called
GENRDD nested within it.
In JCL, we can set what's
called the symbolic parameters.
Symbolic parameters, usually
just called the symbolics,
can be assigned through
three statements;
PROC statements, EXEC
statements, and SET statements.
This means you can define
a symbolic parameter,
assign it a value,
and then you can just reference
that symbolic later on.
So the next time you run the JCL,
if you want to run it with
a different value in there,
just change the
symbolic definition.
You get to define
the symbolic names and values.
In addition to the symbolic
parameters that you define,
there are a number
of system symbols,
and these come in two flavors.
There's dynamic system symbols
whose values can
change at any point after
an IPL like
current date and time.
The full set of
dynamic system symbols is
fixed and you cannot
define additional ones.
What you have is what you get.
There's also
static system symbols.
These are set at IPL time and
won't change until
the next time the system IPLs.
So for example, the system
name and SYSPLEX name.
Static system symbols
have two types.
There is system-defined
static symbols,
and these include ampersend
SYSCLONE, SYSNAME,SYSPLEX,
SYSR1, and SYSALVL,
that's used for
the system architecture level.
Then, there's installation-defined
static symbols,
which a system programmer,
maybe that's you, gets to set.
These are defined in the
SYS1.PROCLIB IEASYM
member.
In the example here,
you'll see a mix
of JCL symbols in
red and system symbols in blue.
Note that you can use
static system symbols such
as SYSNAME in started
task JCL procedures,
but not in regular batch JCL.
Overriding a parameter modifies
only the one parameter.
All the other parameters stay
unaffected unless you
modify them as well.
So if you override the dataset
name on a DD statement,
which includes the unit and
VOL = SR parameters,
it'll change the dataset name,
but the unit and VOL
= SR parameters
will remain unchanged.
But you can't correct
invalid parameters in
a procedure through overrides
because before doing
any substitutions,
the system scans the original
procedure statements
and issues error messages
based on those.
So it's got to be valid
before you issue overrides.
If you made a mistake
while you were creating
a procedure and you
typed al instead of all,
we've all been there, you can't
substitute your way
out of that situation.
Lastly, you can
override the output
JCL and DD statements by
specifying the step
for which they apply.
If no step has been
named previously,
the changes apply to
the very first step.
If you have specified a step
and you want to change
a couple of more output
JCL and DD statements,
you only have to specify
it the first time.
The ones that follow it,
it just assumes it's in
the same one is above.
There's your introduction
to JCL procedures.
We got into some fairly
tricky concepts there.
So don't worry if you feel a
little lost, overwhelmed,
or intimidated.
I'm looking at
my camera operator right
now and it looks like
he's about to pass out.
So I'm going to go check on him,
and I'll see you in
the next lesson.
Hey man, you all right?
Doing all right?